README.md, before:

This repository has been designed for use in gem5 tutorials.
It has been built with the assumption users will utilize [Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) to learn gem5.

The repository contains the following directories:

* [docker](docker) :
The source code for the Docker image used by [.devcontainer/Dockerfile](.devcontainer/Dockerfile) to create the Codespace Docker container.
* gem5 :
v21.2.1.1 of gem5.
* gem5-resources :
gem5-resources which may be used with v21.2 of gem5.

**Note:** 'gem5' and 'gem5-resources' are submodules though the [.devcontainer/devcontainer.json](.devcontainer/devcontainer.json) file specifies that a `git module update --init --recursive` command is executed when the Codespace Docker container is created.

The container used by Codespaces is built from [.devcontainer/Dockerfile](.devcontainer/Dockerfile).
It contains:

* All gem5 dependencies (inc. optional dependencies).
* Prebuilt gem5 binaries:
    - `/usr/local/bin/gem5-x86`
    - `/usr/local/bin/gem5-arm`
    - `/usr/local/bin/gem5-riscv`
* A RISCV64 and an AARCH64 GNU cross-compiler:
    * RISCV64 GNU cross-compiler found in `/opt/cross-compiler/riscv64-linux/`.
    * AARCH64 GNU cross-compiler found in `/opt/cross-compiler/aarch64-linux/`.

## Beginners' example

The following can be used within the Codespace container to run a basic gem5 simulation straight away:

```
gem5-arm gem5/configs/example/gem5_library/arm-hello.py
```

This will execute a "Hello world!" program inside a simulated ARM system.

## How to deal with git modules

This needs to be explained.

Commit message:

Add explanation of how to update submodules
Part solves Issue #1.

README.md, after:

This repository has been designed for use in gem5 tutorials.
It has been built with the assumption users will utilize [Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) to learn gem5.

The repository contains the following directories:

* [docker](docker) :
The source code for the Docker image used by [.devcontainer/Dockerfile](.devcontainer/Dockerfile) to create the Codespace Docker container.
* gem5 :
v21.2.1.1 of gem5.
* gem5-resources :
gem5-resources which may be used with v21.2 of gem5.

**Note:** 'gem5' and 'gem5-resources' are submodules though the [.devcontainer/devcontainer.json](.devcontainer/devcontainer.json) file specifies that a `git module update --init --recursive` command is executed when the Codespace Docker container is created.

The container used by Codespaces is built from [.devcontainer/Dockerfile](.devcontainer/Dockerfile).
It contains:

* All gem5 dependencies (inc. optional dependencies).
* Prebuilt gem5 binaries:
    - `/usr/local/bin/gem5-x86`
    - `/usr/local/bin/gem5-arm`
    - `/usr/local/bin/gem5-riscv`
* A RISCV64 and an AARCH64 GNU cross-compiler:
    * RISCV64 GNU cross-compiler found in `/opt/cross-compiler/riscv64-linux/`.
    * AARCH64 GNU cross-compiler found in `/opt/cross-compiler/aarch64-linux/`.

## Beginners' example

The following can be used within the Codespace container to run a basic gem5 simulation straight away:

```
gem5-arm gem5/configs/example/gem5_library/arm-hello.py
```

This will execute a "Hello world!" program inside a simulated ARM system.

## Updating submodules

In this project we have two submodules: 'gem5' and 'gem5-resources'.
These are automatically obtained when the codespaces is initialized.
At the time of writing the 'gem5' directory is checked out to the stable branch at v21.2.1.1.
The 'gem5-resources' repository is checkoued out to revision '871e715', which should contain resources with known compatibility with gem5 v21.2.

To update the git submodules to be in-sync with their remote origins (that hosted on our [googlesource](https://gem5.googlesource.com)), execute the following command:

```sh
git submodule update --remote
```

This repository may be updated to these in-sync submodules by running the following (this assumes you have correct permissions to do so):

```sh
git add gem5 gem5-resources
git commit -m "git submodules updated"
git push
```
